=> gemini://gemini.dazlab.uk/index.gmi Go Back

# Comics & Manga
### Prologue

Comics, or sequential art if you prefer to use it's more ostentatious name, is by nature a visual medium. You might wonder, then, whether Gemspace is a good conduit for talking about this, and the answer is yes.

Everything starts with the written word.

I'll use this space to talk about various subjects within the realm of the comics industry, what I've read, what I thought about it etc.

This is a new section, so check back soon for more.

### Akai Ringo
#### Maruta Kouji

>Japan in the Reiwa XX era, where sexual activity is illegal. Hikaru Inuta, an honor student whose father is the director of the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare's Sexual Enforcement Division, witnesses something shocking at a club he visits for the first time with her friend. There are a lot of people who enjoy sex with a great deal of alcohol and music! And among them is Inuta's favorite idol, Misora. In front of this unusual sight, an impulse that he's never felt runs around Inuta's body!!

When I first happened upon this Manga, my initial impression was "Wow, this is pure filth!" But as the chapters unfold, there is quite a compelling narrative behind it. With likeable characters, some nicely drawn panels and a lot of steamy scenes (if watching drawings have sex does it for you, personally does nothing for me).

### Tokimeki No Ikenie
#### Hiyodori Sachiko

>This is a story about Mari, a modest and inconspicuous girl who dreams of becoming a manga artist. Born into a complicated family, she lives a modest school life while hanging onto her dream. One day, after saving Shigeru Hanamizuki, the most popular boy in class, from a traffic accident, he confesses to her. 

This is such a charming little story. The main character, Mari, is adorable, and her growing relationship with Shigeru has you really gunning for them.

### Shibito no Koe wo Kiku ga Yoi
#### Hiyodori Sachiko

"Back then, we used to play together all the time. At some point we just stpped talking. And then she went and died..."

> Jun Kishida is a sickly high school student who can see dead people. One person in particular is following him around: his childhood friend Ryoko Hayakawa. Even after he uncovered the truth behind Hayakawa's death, she stayed by his side. As he and his classmates get into even more strange and mortally dangerous situations, Hayakawa's spirit quietly aids him. 

This is a wonderfully creepy series by the same Mangaka who brought us Tokimeki No Ikenie. 
