=> gemini://galaxyhub.uk/index.gmi Go Back

## The Next-Gen Distro's
### Linux, dominant in the server market, still has a way to go to capture the imagination of many desktop users. We take a look at the future on Linux on the desktop.

Cast your mind back 15 years, to that pre-credit crunch optimism of the mid-2000s. Windows users were appalled by Windows Vista, and this new Ubuntu operating system was claiming that it could displace Windows. This, despite being based on Linux and thinking that orangey-brown hue was a good desktop colour.

Well, Windows may not have been wiped out by Ubuntu, but Linux has developed in leaps and bounds. It's more usable than ever, and key industry players take it much more seriously now. Thanks to Valve and Vulkan, we can play thousands of Windows-only titles on our Linux boxes. More companies than ever are shipping Linux on consumer hardware. Your wireless hardware probably works with it.

Best of all, there's a fine range of distros to choose from. Ubuntu has always been a great place to start, but it's not to everyone's taste. Here, we present our pick of the next generation of distros, sure to ruffle a few feathers. Since making Linux easy is very difficult, we've made a point to mention some usable distros, including our long-time favourite for beginners: Linux Mint.

Next, we'll explore some of the best-looking distros out there that will give you a truly modern desktop. In particular elementary OS, through its Pantheon desktop, is doing the unthinkable by making Linux simple, powerful, and - dare we say it - at least a little bit Mac OS-like.

Finally, we'll look at distros that are leveraging the latest in open-source technologies. You might not want these technologies (or so it seems by the number of complaints out there about Wayland, Systemd et al.). Or you might not be able to use your favourite software with them easily, but these will shape desktop Linux in the years to come.

### Linux Milestones
Linux distributions have come a long way since the good old days. In the beginning, of course, there were no distros. You'd start with the kernel, somehow bootstrap a barebones system, fetch some GNU tools, mess with the make files, compile those packages, install them, realise you'd got your Makefile wrong, tidy up the mess. Rinse, lather, repeat. It was all great fun.

More often than not you had to get these things on CD, or even floppy disk, in the post, unless you had access to the Internet (or a friend in a computer science department). Then in 1992 came SLS, which inspired Slackware and later frustrated Ian Murdock into creating Debian. Yggdrasil, the first Linux live CD, was launched shortly after SLS, which required a gluttonous 8MB of memory and a gargantuan 100MB of disk space. The first stable version of Debian didn't appear until 1996, by which time Red Hat Linux was on the scene and all of a sudden people realised there was money to be made with Linux.

It's easy to overlook the contributions of those pioneer distributions, and other giants such as SUSE and Mandrake. And indeed those of lesser-heard ones such as Conectiva (a distant ancestor of Mageia that popularised Linux in South America). There's a tendency to just focus on Ubuntu as the great humaniser of Linux.

By the same token, there's a tendency to dismiss desktop Ubuntu today as a sideshow to Canonical's commercial success. Ubuntu continues to do great things for Linux, and is an excellent distribution for beginners and professionals alike. But what happened in the mid-2000s was pretty exciting. Suddenly, here was Linux that anyone could use. It did everything that Windows XP did (except maybe talk to your wireless device). There was an office suite that could mostly open Word documents. Finally, something was standing up to the Microsoft juggernaut...

Things are different now. Microsoft's attitude towards open source has changed and desktop computing isn't the be-all and end-all it once was. The Web is truly OS-agnostic, so there's no danger of say, your bank not supporting you if you use Linux. We take for granted the ability to watch Netflix or play games, but this would have been unimaginable just a few years ago. Today Intel, Oracle and even Microsoft (sort of) now have their own Linux offerings. A few stand-out distros have emerged that have brought genuine technical innovation, whether technical or ideological, to the Linux world.

### User-Friendly Usability
Let's look at Linux Mint first, which continues to be a favourite of ours. In particular, it's one that we still recommend to users who are taking their first steps with Linux. Initially (the 1.0 release in 2006 was a beta based on Kubuntu), it took the Ubuntu codebase and bundled flash and Wi-Fi firmware to make for a better out-of-the-box experience. It experimented with its own codebase for a couple of years, but then returned to Ubuntu's and since then the two have always been package-compatible. This enables Mint to piggy-back off the treasure trove of packages in the Ubuntu repositories, while still providing its own experience.

When Ubuntu switched to its Unity desktop, Mint offered something more conventional in the form of its Cinnamon desktop (which first appeared in Mint 13). Cinnamon was initially based on Gnome 3, but soon became its own thing. For die-hard traditionalists, they also offered the then-fledgling MATE desktop, a fork of Gnome 2. Both Cinnamon and MATE continue to thrive, while Unity has been abandoned by Canonical (though the latest version lives on in the UBPorts mobile OS, and the penultimate edition is still tended to by a small but loyal community). When Ubuntu 18.04 was released, sans 32-bit ISO, Mint went ahead and produced its own (32-bit packages were still built for 18.04, this is not the case for the latest edition, so Mint 20.2 is 64-bit only, as was Mint 20.1).

We're still waiting for Mint 20.3 to arrive, and Clem and the team have remained largely schtum about what to expect. In previous releases, it's been as much about what they've removed from Ubuntu as what they've added. For example, the 'anonymous' telemetry information that you have to opt out of sending in Ubuntu is banished from Mint.

As Ubuntu moves towards the Snap packaging format, some Mint users voiced concern about whether these would become the norm in Mint, too. They (unlike Flatpaks and AppImages) rely on a proprietary app store after all, which makes Canonical a sort of kingpin in the software distribution ring. The team reassured users that Mint wouldn't contribute to this Snap monopoly. In 2019, they said they'd support Snaps as long as they were useful, and 'didn't become the de facto standard [for packages]'. Now they've put their money where their mouth is. Try installing Chromium with apt in Ubuntu 21.04 and you'll find you get a dummy package that installs the Snap version. This is irrefutable evidence of Snap usurping a traditional package, and something the Mint team won't stand for.

### Next-Gen App Distribution
Let's take a time-out to talk about the Snap/Flatpak/AppImage thing, as I know this causes some confusion amongst newer Linux users.

Flatpaks, Snaps, AppImages: they all seek to make it easier for developers to ship software in a distribution-agnostic manner. Whereas Snaps rely on a central app store, anyone can set up their own Flatpak remote. That Flathub repo [1] is a good place to find popular apps. Flatpaks are OSTree images too, which is why the two integrate so nicely in Endless OS, which we'll get to later. When you download your first (non-trivial) application on Endless OS (or your first Flatpak on another OS), you'll find the download is very large. This is because it depends on a large runtime (e.g. Gnome) Flatpak. Once you have this you won't need to download it again for Flatpaks, which depend on it. These runtime Flatpaks are updated incrementally, so subsequent large downloads should be a rarity and (unlike deb packages) there are no issues with requiring a particular version.

Fedora's Silverblue desktop distribution brings atomic upgrades to the Fedora ecosystem. Here, a hybrid packaging system, RPM-OSTree, is used so that the base OS image can be modified in layers. This is useful for installing low-level packages, such as drivers and shells.

=> https://flathub.org THe FlatHub Repo

### ...Back To Mint
In recent Mint incarnations, there have been some notable changes; Snaps no longer being installed by default being the major shift. Although the snapd daemon is now absent, you can add it if you wish. As a precaution, traditional apt packages are blocked from installing snapd to prevent them acting, like Chromium's, duplicitously.

Linux Mint makes waves by giving users what they want. It sounds harsh, and there are all kinds of complexities behind this, but other distros seem reluctant to listen to their users. Alas, the most common gripe "why can't it just work?" is alive and well today (though this applies to other OSes and in fact all forms of technology). A sad trend that Ubuntu's accessibility inadvertently started was frankly unqualified users taking to bug trackers and venting their rage. People would describe their problems (badly) in angry block capitals, they wouldn't supply log files or hardware information, they wouldn't attempt to pin down the problem, they would fail to do even the most cursory search for other people having similar problems or, worse, they would jump on similar bug reports crying "me too!" - even though their issue was different.

Developers shied away from engaging with such reports. The canned response thanking these newcomers for their submission and referring to reporting guidelines has become ubiquitous. One place Linux Mint excelled was through its community helping each other, and developers engaging with that community rather than being bothered by them. Their "Newbie Questions" forum still bears the tagline "All gurus were once newbies" and is still for the most part free of more experienced users being condescending to newcomers' questions. Even where those newcomers didn't read their helpful guide on how to ask for help.

### Endlessly Usable
Over the past decade some Linux distributions have appeared that go out of their way to be more usable (and less breakable) by regular humans. One such is Endless OS. Originally tied to Endless Computers' hardware (budget small form-factor PCs aimed at developing countries), the Debian-based distro is now available to all, and comes in a few forms. The full desktop edition (available in seven languages) is a whopping 16GB in size, but includes the full text of Wikipedia, several Khan Academy lectures, and Endless' own educational tools. It's aimed at offline, and even off-grid, usage. There's a mover conventional desktop version (only 3GB), a VirtualBox image and finally an image for the Raspberry Pi 4. Besides their hardware (including the Spark kids' laptop) their educational contributions (such as their immersive Terminal Two coding tutorials [2]), Endless has taken a particularly innovative approach to system updates.

Such updates are a necessary inconvenience, but Microsoft has unfortunately turned a lot of people against them. Most egregiously when it force-updated thousands of Windows 7 machines to Windows 10, in many cases breaking them. But also, unless you tell Windows 10 to do otherwise, it has a habit of forcefully installing large updates at shutdown time (no good if your computer is in the same room you sleep in) or at boot time (no good if you actually want to use your computer when you turn it on). Another sad situation is when disk space is low, large updates will download and not be able to install. In some cases (particularly cheap tablets) this can make them entirely unbootable.

Linux updates tend not to be so disruptive, but they do on occasion break things. This is particularly upsetting for new users, especially if they're confronted with a confusing error message and a busybox shell or worse, a blank screen. It's easy to blame these issues on user error, or the nVidia driver, but people shouldn't have to learn all about chrooting and modifying system files just to get their desktops back. Linux Mint conceded this, ad that's why it launched its Timeshift tool for rolling back updates. Endless OS goes one step further: The whole filesystem is updated at once. This so-called atomic upgrade uses OSTree, itself described as "Git for filesystems" (or in this case operating systems). Of course, this doesn't mean every Endless OS device ends up with exactly the same filesystem (that wouldn't work unless every device was identical, hardware and software-wise). Rather, configuration files (say, everything in /boot and /etc) are layered atop  the base OSTree image, and individual applications are installed as Flatpaks. You can roll back the entire OS to a previous version of the OS (just like you can switch Git branches) at the press of a button.

While the underlying OS is based on Debian, you can't readily use apt and .deb packages (or any traditional packaging format) on Endless OS. The OSTree/Flatpak combination makes for a bulletproof platform because the root filesystem is read-only. Even if the power goes out mid-upgrade, the previous incarnation of the OS will still be accessible and the upgrade can be resumed. Installing an application won't break the base image because Flatpaks are self-contained. OSTree images are incremental too (only changes between versions are stored) and so the ability to roll back t a previous version doesn't come with a huge disk space cost.

=> https://terminaltwo.com Terminal Two [2]

### The New Generation
Ubuntu-derivatives are a dime a dozen. Some of you could probably create one yourself by installing a desktop and changing some default applications. But some are simply outstanding, taking the rock-solid Ubuntu base and adding unique and powerful features atop of it.

One such is elementary OS which, through its own Pantheon desktop, brings a sleekness and simplicity that rivals Mac OS. Instead of forcing users to read manuals (which in many cases just raises more questions), one of elementary's aims is to have minimal documentation. It aims to be sufficiently intuitive that users should be able to figure things out for themselves. Another of its design aims is "concision", keeping things simple and avoiding bloat. Finally, it strives to "accessible configuration": not bombarding the user with options (think KDE), or asking for information that could be obtained automatically. This all might sound like fluffy design speak, but when you see how the app indicators convey with subtlety useful information, how the infobars gently notify you of exigent situations and how everything integrates so nicely (like a new-age type wittering on about how "it's all one, brah"), then you'll see there's substance to it all.

### Contributing to elementary OS
Elementary OS is not free as in beer. It uses a pay-what-you-want model, and when you download it you're asked to make a contribution. Ubuntu and some others use this model too, and nothing bad happens if you select £0. There's nothing inherently wrong with charging money for software - even free (as in speech) software. It's even expressly permitted by the GPL. Elementary, in asking for donations rather than slapping on a price tag, is striking a balance. It's ensuring that people get reimbursed for their work, while at the same time making it available to all. If you disagree with that stance then you're under no obligation to use it. If you want to contribute in another way, you can help fix bugs or help users on the forum (as you can for any software). There's even a bug bounty program, so if you're willing to pay for a feature (or would like to get paid for fixing something), then subject to team approval and someone coding it, you can.

Fiscal models aside, elementary OS is beautiful. The Plank dock gives easy access to commonly-used applications, and the bundled ones all follow a uniform design. They're all coded in Vala, which makes them integrate easily with GTK (or elementary's custom suerset of it, dubbed Granite). They're free of unnecessary configuration options, proving that sane defaults are possible. Most interestingly, many of them don't have an explicit Save option. They'll save as you go and reopen to the same state they were left. The AppCenter (sic) includes a section of curated programs (that adhere to elementary's design philosophy and have been reviewed by the team) as well as everything you'd find in Ubuntu's erstwhile Software Centre (now the Snap store). Flatpaks are supported out-of-the-box via a custom tool, Sideload. Unlike Apple's walled-garden approach, elementary makes it possible for adventurous users to stray from the curated base camp and brave the open source jungle.

Besides looking pretty and being a pleasure to use, elementary OS is conscious about privacy. Onboarding, which debuted in the 5.1 release, offers to turn on location services or automatically delete temporary files (and optionally Trashed items). This launches on first run for each user (the new user selection screen is also lovely, by the way) and also guides users to the documentation, Night Light settings and AppCenter. Many users will have long-abandoned email clients, opting instead for Web-based offerings from their provider. But elementary's Mail program might just spur those users to make their inboxes local again.
