```
╭━━━┳━━━┳╮╱╱╭━━━┳━╮╭━┳╮╱╱╭╮╭╮╱╭┳╮╱╭┳━━╮
┃╭━╮┃╭━╮┃┃╱╱┃╭━╮┣╮╰╯╭┫╰╮╭╯┃┃┃╱┃┃┃╱┃┃╭╮┃
┃┃╱╰┫┃╱┃┃┃╱╱┃┃╱┃┃╰╮╭╯╰╮╰╯╭╯┃╰━╯┃┃╱┃┃╰╯╰╮
┃┃╭━┫╰━╯┃┃╱╭┫╰━╯┃╭╯╰╮╱╰╮╭╯╱┃╭━╮┃┃╱┃┃╭━╮┃
┃╰┻━┃╭━╮┃╰━╯┃╭━╮┣╯╭╮╰╮╱┃┃╱╱┃┃╱┃┃╰━╯┃╰━╯┃
╰━━━┻╯╱╰┻━━━┻╯╱╰┻━╯╰━╯╱╰╯╱╱╰╯╱╰┻━━━┻━━━╯
```

=> gemini://galaxyhub.uk/index.gmi Go Home

# Latest GalaxyHub News

### 09-01-2022
Sorry Guys, I've been away from Gemspace for quite a bit of time. I've been recovering from COVID-19. I'm still experiencing numerous symptoms, due to so-called "long COVID", and it's not been much fun. Hoping to start posting again soon, as well as introducing a few more sections.

In the meantime, let's all have a great 2022!

All the Best,
ed

### 31-10-2021
Following feedback by some lovely Geminauts over at Geddit [1], I'm making a few modifications / improvements.

* Implementing an Atom/RSS feed for GalaxyHub, enabling Geminauts who subscribe to receive updates when new articles and news items are launched. Hopefully have this up within the next day or two.

* Made some cosmetic modifications to the Home capsule page in order to provide a consistent experience across all Gemini clients, as well as to maintain compliance with the specification itself.

Please continue to provide feedback. In lieu of any CGI scriting to enable comments directly, you can use Geddit [1] and search for the GalaxyHub thread, or alternatively use the email address on the main page.

For anyone who has tried reaching out via email in the last week or so, I apologise as there have been some issues with the mail server and I have been unable to respond, but will do so as soon as practicable.

All the Best,
ed

=> gemini://geddit.glv.one/ Geddit Capsule Home [1]
